tree: handle schema contravariantly when generating input types (#22874)
microsoft/FluidFramework: .changeset/shy-dots-prove.md

---
"fluid-framework": minor
"@fluidframework/tree": minor
---
---
"section": tree
---

Improve strictness of input tree types when non-exact schema are provided

When the type of the schema is not exactly specified, for example:

```typescript
const schemaFactory = new SchemaFactory("com.myApp");
class A extends schemaFactory.object("A", {}) {}
class B extends schemaFactory.array("B", schemaFactory.number) {}

> // Gives imprecise type (typeof A | typeof B)[]

Reviewer: I couldn't really understand why the suggestions to remove the ambiguity worked until I got to the end of the changeset and saw a comment pointing out this is the "correct" type, so pointing it out here seems good to make it clear from the start.
```suggestion
// Gives imprecise type (typeof A | typeof B)[], where [typeof A, typeof B] is what would work best for Tree
```

const schema = [A, B];

const config = new TreeViewConfiguration({ schema });
const view = sharedTree.viewWith(config);

// Does not compile since setter for root is typed `never` due to imprecise schema.

> view.root = [];

Reviewer 2: Curious: what does the error look like in this case? Is it intelligible?

```

> This is disallowed since the same schema type could be produced either of:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is disallowed since the same schema type could produce either of:
```

Author: ```suggestion
The assignment of `view.root` is disallowed since the same schema type could be either of:
```

> This is disallowed since the same schema type could be produced either of:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is disallowed since the same schema type could be produced by either of:
```

```typescript
const schema: (typeof A | typeof B)[] = [A];
```

```typescript
const schema: (typeof A | typeof B)[] = [B];
```

To avoid this ambiguity use one of:

```typescript
const schema = [A, B] as const;
const config = new TreeViewConfiguration({ schema });
```

```typescript
const config = new TreeViewConfiguration({ schema: [A, B] });
```

To help update existing code which accidentally depended on this bug an `@alpha` API `unsafeArrayToTuple` has been provided.

> Many usages of this API will produce incorrectly types outputs, but when given `AllowedTypes` arrays which should not contain any unions, but accidentally got flatted to a single union, it can fix them:

Reviewer: Avoids the "A but B, but C, D" which was a bit hard to parse on first read.
```suggestion
Many usages of this API will produce incorrectly typed outputs. However, when given `AllowedTypes` arrays which should not contain any unions, but accidentally got flatted to a single union, it can fix them:
```
